# Developer Documentation

The Preflight project intends to offer tooling that can be used to evaluate your
operator projects to see if they pass Red Hat operator certification
requirements.

The project will include a commandline interface that will accept your operator
bundle image as an input, and will run validate that your operator bundle
complies with a configurable set of checks.

The project also has a goal of providing a library that can be leveraged to
check your operator bundle's certification compliance in your own testing use cases,
including writing and ensuring your bundle complies with your own custom tests.

## Design

The current design leverages a series of interfaces for handling the following
tasks related to check validation:

* managing container image assets (e.g. pulling from an external registry,
  managing an image tarball on disk, etc.)

* enforcing checks against the assets on disk, and storing the results of the
  checks

* formatting the results into various output formats to fit various known use
  cases.

The interface definitions for managing each of these tasks should allow for
developers to:

* define their own checks and implementation details in addition to the
  built-in checks

* define custom output formats other than those built-in to the tooling.

The included CLI will leverage these interfaces to provide built-in checks,
built-in formatters, and built-in container asset managers.

## Libraries

The `certification` library contains the built-in check definitions that are
used to validate an operator bundle is in compliance with Red Hat's operator
bundle certification requirements. These are the built-in tests that can be
enabled when using the compiled binary.

The `certification/formatters` library includes the necessary constructs to
build out your own custom formatters. Developers can leverage the included
`certification.formatters.GenericFormatter` struct to build out custom
formatters by simply passing in a `certification/formatters.FormatterFunc` and
additional metadata, or they can build out their own by implementing the
`certification/formatters.ResponseFormatter` interface.

The `certification/runtime` library includes the necessary constructs to build
out your own check runner. A check runner just refers to the interface that
registers what checks to execute, and to which asset.
*TODO: complete the reusable generic implementation and documentation*

## CLI Implementation

The Preflight CLI utilizes the libraries and design mentioned above. The bulk
of the CLI code is found in the `cmd` package.

Currently, we assume that the user must provide a single positional argument:
the container image which will be checked for compliance with our checks.

The user can then further tailor their execution by specifying configurables
such as the exact checks to enforce, and the output format. The CLI currently
allows for the definition of those configurables via flags (e.g.
`--output-format`), but environment variables are also parsed, with flag values
taking precedence. See `cmd/constants.go` for the existing supported environment
variables. 

The CLI will take all user input and derive a `certification/runtime.Config`
instance with the appropriate values filled in. Then, a check runner and a
formatter are derived based on that configuration (commonly seen as
`NewForConfig(...)` functions available in each package).

The check engine will execute validation functions based on enabled checks
defined in the environment, or alternatively all checks if no checks were specified.

Finally, the results of those validations will be passed to the formatter which
will prepare them for final output to the user.

## CheckEngine Implementation

The built-in CheckEngine is referred to as `shell` (this name may change
as we make calls to other tools as well). It issues calls out to `podman` and
other shell tools directly in order to determine if the provided asset is in
compliance.

## Formatter Implementation

The built-in formatters allow for formatting output as JSON or XML. The final
user-facing response is still being defined.
